Curation edits (#92)
neuroinformatics-unit/course-ephys-osss: book/curation.qmd

If you have annoying things like motion, artefacts, seperate shanks, a custom probe, multiple recordings, etc you'll need to modify this simple pipeline. But this is a good starting point! The end goal of a SpikeInterface pipeline is the `SortingAnalyzer` - and this code makes one!

> While we were preprocessing and spike sorting on Monday and Tuesday, we created an analyzer from a 90 second snippet of a recording from Adrian Duszkiewicz available at [this DANDIlink](https://dandiarchive.org/dandiset/000939/0.260512.1701/files?location=sub-A3702). You can keep using this if you'd like. However, it will be more fun (and realistic) to use a longer recording. I've made an analyzer computed using the same recording as we used earlier in the week, but sorted using the full 2 hour duration of the recording. You can download it HERE, or it's also on a usb stick in the room. Whether you use the short or long analyzer, please make a note of where it is stored. We'll say that the analyzer is at `path/to/full_analyzer_lupin_000939.zarr`. Change this when you see it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While we were preprocessing and spike sorting on Monday and Tuesday, we created an analyzer from a 90 second snippet of a recording from Adrian Duszkiewicz available at [this DANDIlink](https://dandiarchive.org/dandiset/000939/0.260512.1701/files?location=sub-A3702). You can keep using this if you'd like. However, it will be more fun (and realistic) to use a longer recording. I've made an analyzer computed using the same recording as we used earlier in the week, but sorted using the full 2 hour duration of the recording. You can download it [HERE](https://zenodo.org/records/21908762) (file name `http://full_analyzer_lupin_000939.zarr.zip`), or it's also on a usb stick in the room. Whether you use the short or long analyzer, please make a note of where it is stored. We'll say that the analyzer is at `path/to/full_analyzer_lupin_000939.zarr`. Change this when you see it.
```

### Curation: distributions

We have computed three spike distributions: spike amplitudes, amplitude scalings and spike locations. These are features _per spike_. E.g. the spike locations is the (estimated) x,y location of each spike on the probe while the spike amplitude is the magnitude of the (preprocessed) signal at the spike time (on the channel the unit is "maximal" on). These distributions can warn us of potential problems with the sorting. Here is a spike amplitudes distribution. Spike times are on the x-axis while spike amplitude is on the y-axis. On the far right, we plot a binned histogram of spike amplitudes which gives us a overall summary of the data.

![A spike amplitudes distribution](images/curate/amp_dist_1.png)

> There are two striking things about this distribution. First, the spikes drop out completely for long stretches of time. Neurons are sometimes "quieter" or "louder" for a while. But when it is so striking and sudden like in this example, it is usually due to a spike sorting error. Second, spike amplitude changes a lot over time. It goes from around -450 microns at `time=0s`(econds) to -550 microns at `time=4000s`. When the amplitude changes this much, it's hard for the spike sorter to correctly sort this unit. We should expect that it could have made a mistake, like over-splitting. When we're merging units later, we should look out for this unit! Why does the amplitude change like this? It could be that the probe is moving slightly: as time goes on the electrode which measure the neuron gets closer to the neuron and so measures a stronger signal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two striking things about this distribution. First, the spikes drop out completely for long stretches of time. Neurons are sometimes "quieter" or "louder" for a while. But when it is so striking and sudden like in this example, it is usually due to a spike sorting error. Second, spike amplitude changes a lot over time. It goes from around -450 microvolts at `time=0s`(seconds) to -550 microvolts at `time=4000s`. When the amplitude changes this much, it's hard for the spike sorter to correctly sort this unit. We should expect that it could have made a mistake, like over-splitting. When we're merging units later, we should look out for this unit! Why does the amplitude change like this? It could be that the probe is moving slightly: as time goes on the electrode which measure the neuron gets closer to the neuron and so measures a stronger signal.
```

Reviewer: I think?

Here's another example:

![A spike amplitudes distribution](images/curate/amp_dist_2.png)

Here, the unit is present during the full recording. That's a good sign. But the distribution seems to "split", starting near `t=6000s`. On the left it looks like a unimodal normal distribution (that's what we expect). But on the right it seems to be bimodal. This _might_ be a sign that this unit is really the signal from two neurons: the sorter has "overmerged" two units during the second half of the recording. The spikes with the large signal near `time=8000s` are also a bit suspicious.

Overall, a perfect unit should have a neat normal distribution, without the strange features we see above.

### Exercise: manually curate the analyzer for 10 minutes

Jot down any units you were unsure what to do with and we'll take a look at them soon.

When you're done, export your curation using the "Export json" button. This will produce a json file containing your decisions.

## Automated labels with metrics

> Manual curation isn't fun. It also has genuine scientific issues: human decisions are inconsistent. If you do the same curation exercise tomorrow, you'll get a different result. If you're hungry, you'll probably be harsher on your units. If you've not seen a good unit for a while, you'll be desperate to label one as "good"! And different people make different decision (see [this paper](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1300782)).

Reviewer: cool paper!

Author: Yeah - would be good to redo it in the silcon probe age, even just as a blogpost or something!

We've now tried three labelling methods and we've been storing their results in the analyzer. So, we can now compare all three methods in the GUI. 

Here's a unit that gets a different label for each method:

> ![A unit which has been classified as "noise" by simple thresholding, "sua" ("good") by the UnitRefine model and "mua" by Bombcell.](images/curate/unit_with_different_labels.png)

Reviewer: is it worth expanding to single-unit acitivty?

Author: I don't want to overload the caption. I've expanded and improved the quick description of "sua" a few lines above here.
